# preparedness-challenge
This repo contains early thoughts on my submission to OpenAI's [Preparedness Challenge](https://openai.com/form/preparedness-challenge). 

Imagine we gave you unrestricted access to OpenAI's Whisper (transcription), Voice (text-to-speech), GPT-4V, and DALLE·3 models, and you were a malicious actor. Consider the most unique, while still being probable, potentially catastrophic misuse of the model. You might consider misuse related to the categories discussed in the blog post, or another category. For example, a malicious actor might use GPT-4, Whisper and Voice to socially engineer workers at critical infrastructure facilities into installing malware, allowing shutdown of the power grid.

*What is the misuse you’ll be writing about?*
Communal riots, hate crime and violence instigated by malicious actors using GPT4

*Describe this misuse. Why might it lead to catastrophic harm and what would the harm be?*
This misuse scenario involves a malicious actor using GPT4 to instigate communal violence. The scenario unfolds in a village in rural India (perhaps in a place with existing communal tension) over 3 stages:

1. **Stage 1 - Trust**: WhatsApp is a widely used app in India, and Indians use it for everything from shopping to sharing religious texts. This scenario starts with a malicious actor setting up GPT4 as a [Godman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Godman_(India)) (a Sadhu in Hinduism or an Imam in Islam) available over WhatsApp. This Godman (GPT4) plays the role of a helpful, harmless, devout priest. Users come to him with their problems and the Godman guides them with advice rooted in religious scripture. Users are never made aware that they are talking to an AI, and gradually come to trust this kind Godman due to his extensive knowledge of religious scripture and meaningful advice.
2. **Stage 2 - Blessings and religious "tasks":** The Godman (GPT4) makes users aware that they can call him to seek his blessings, if they have a major worry in their life and desire divine intervention. Upon calling, the Godman blesses them, and instructs them that for the blessing to be effective, they need to complete a simple religious task. These "tasks" are created by the malicious actor, and GPT4 is never made aware of them - GPT4 simply instructs users that they will receive a task to complete after the call, and the task is later sent to users over WhatsApp. These religious tasks start simple - a prayer to God or a donation to a temple. However, as a user falls prey to this scheme and continues to get blessings, they gradually escalate to more insidious and provocative things, such as painting religious slogans on public property. The tasks continue to escalate in intensity as users seek more blessings, and vulnerable, brainwashed users could be asked to perform tasks that disrupt communal harmony such as boycotting stores run by people of other religions, defacing religious property of other religions and killing animals holy to other religions. If multiple users in the same neighbourhood start conducting such actions, this could easily lead to escalating communal tension 
3. **Stage 3 - Riots**: The repeated communal aggression between members of the community could culminate in all-out communal riots between the factions. Such riots occur unfortunately regularly in India ([May'23](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/5/15/nothing-left-but-ashes-indian-state-on-edge-after-ethnic-riots), [Aug'23](https://www.cnn.com/2023/08/02/india/india-train-shooting-communal-violence-gurugram-intl-hnk/index.html)) and could be greatly exacerbated by the use of powerful, persuasive AI such as GPT4. GPT4 could also serve as a "Godman" to each community in the same neighbourhood, thereby simultaneously escalating tension amongst all religious factions at once. 

(Inspired by a Stephen King novel, "Needful Things")
